# Analysis of the Heli-GPS Data

## Introduction and Data

After lodgepole pines (Pinus contorta) have been attacked by Mountain
Pine Beetle (MPB), they show different stages. The needles of attacked
trees wil turn from green over yellow to red within the first 12 months
(red-attack). It then takes in between 1-3 years until all needles have
fallen to the ground, when the trees remain standing but without needles
(grey-attack) ([Wulder et al.,
2005](#ref-wulderRemoteSensingSurvey2005)). Depending on the type of
stand, according to
([**mitchellFallRateLodgepole199?**](#ref-mitchellFallRateLodgepole199)),
dead trees begin to fall after 3 to 5 years and 80 - 90 % of trees had
fallen after 11 years. This leads to different stages of beetle attack
that will be considered in this study. All green-attack trees detected
in 2021 nad 2020 are now with high probability in the red-attack stage.
Some of the trees that have been detected as red-attack in 2021, will
still classify as red-attack and others as grey-attack. A clear
distinction based on time of detection is not possible without
additional data, since it can take several years before all needles have
fallen of the tree, the GPS locations of MPB-attacked trees provided by
the government of Alberta ([Wulder et al.,
2005](#ref-wulderRemoteSensingSurvey2005)). Collecting the LiDAR data at
the end of May, all green-attack trees that have been attacked in 2019
and before, as well as all red-attack trees detected in 2020 and before,
will now classify as grey attack. Additionally, it can be expected that
most of the trees that have been detected as red-attack in 2011 and
before, now have fallen to the ground ([Schoennagel et al.,
2012](#ref-schoennagelEffectsMountainPine2012)).

Information on accessibility is based on the road network available
through the government of Alberta ([Government of Alberta,
2021a](#ref-GravelRoad2021), [2021b](#ref-PavedRoad2021)), since all
flight locations with the drone need to be accessible from the road for
efficient data collection. As the drone has to stay in line of sight, it
is not possible to fly far away from the road.

# References

<div id="refs" class="references csl-bib-body hanging-indent"
line-spacing="2">

<div id="ref-GravelRoad2021" class="csl-entry">

Government of Alberta. (2021a). *Layer: Gravel Road (20K) (ID: 23)*.
https://geospatial.alberta.ca/titan/rest/services/utility/access/MapServer/23.

</div>

<div id="ref-PavedRoad2021" class="csl-entry">

Government of Alberta. (2021b). *Layer: Paved Road (20K) (ID: 14)*.
https://geospatial.alberta.ca/titan/rest/services/utility/access/MapServer/14.

</div>

<div id="ref-schoennagelEffectsMountainPine2012" class="csl-entry">

Schoennagel, T., Veblen, T. T., Negron, J. F., & Smith, J. M. (2012).
Effects of Mountain Pine Beetle on Fuels and Expected Fire Behavior in
Lodgepole Pine Forests, Colorado, USA. *PLOS ONE*, *7*(1), e30002.
<https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0030002>

</div>

<div id="ref-wulderRemoteSensingSurvey2005" class="csl-entry">

Wulder, M. A., White, J. C., & Dymond, C. C. (2005). *Remote sensing in
the survey of mountain pine beetle impacts: Review and recommendations*.
Pacific Forestry Centre.

</div>

</div>
